(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
In this video, we're gonna take a look
at how to store a heap as an array
and in fact, you can store any complete binary tree
as an array and so, when we're dealing with binary heaps,
we can store them as arrays.
So, how do we do it?
The root will go at array position zero
and then we traverse each level in the tree
from left to right and so, the left child
of the root would go into array one
and the right child of the root would go into array two
and then the left child of the left child of the root
would go into array three
and the right child of the left child of the root
would go into array four et cetera,
and so, let's look at an exempla of this.
So, if we have this heap and we looked at this
in the last video,
we're gonna put 22 into array index zero,
then we're gonna traverse the next level
from left to right, so 19 will go into index one
and 18 will go into index two
and then we move down to the next level
and 15's gonna go into three,
three will go into four,
14 will go into five
and four will go into six
and then we move down to the next level
and finally 12 will go into seven
and so, this is how we figure out the parent
and the children for any slot in the array
and so, if we look at the node at array i,
so let's go with 15, so if we go back here,
15 has 12 as its child and its parent is 19.
So, for 15, which is at index three,
so i would be three, to find its left child,
we multiply two by i and add done,
so we're gonna say two times three is six plus one is seven
and so, at array index seven,
there is 12, that's 15's child.
It doesn't have a right child,
you would calculate the right child
by multiplying two by i and adding two
and we'd know it doesn't have a right child
because we'd know that that was out of bounds.
If you wanted to get 15's parent,
and if we go back up, 15's parent is 19,
we use the following expression.
We subtract one from i,
we divide the result from two
and we take the floor of that
and that just means that we're gonna round down
to the nearest whole number
and so, 15 is at position three,
so we'd say three minus one is two
divided by two is one and the floor of that is one
and so, its parent is at index one.
And that's 19.
And so, let's look at another one
that has two children.
Let's look at 18.
So, 18 has 14 and four,
so 14 is its left child, four is its right child
and its parent is 22.
And so, 18 is at position two,
so to find its left child,
we'll multiply two by two, get four,
plus one is five
and so, its left child is 14
and to get its right child
will be two times two is four plus two is six
and that's four and so, we figured out its left
and right children.
Now, to get its parent,
we're gonna subtract one from two,
so we're gonna get one over two
is 0.5 and the floor of that is zero and that's 22.
And so, this is how we store complete binary trees
in an array, it's very important to understand
and remember that we can only do this
with complete binary trees.
Otherwise this wouldn't work
because let's say, if we go back up,
let's say 12 was over here somewhere.
Then we're not gonna be able to use this equation
if we put 12 at seven and we wanna do that
because we don't want empty slots in the array.
These equations wouldn't work.
We're not gonna be able to calculate 12's parent.
We'll get the wrong value.
And so, this works because there are no empty spots
in the tree and so, we can just traverse each level
in turn and fill out the array.
Now let's talk about inserting into the heap.
I talked about this a little bit a couple of videos ago.
So, we always add new items to the end of the array
and then we have to fix the heap
because if we go back here,
let's say we had more array back here
and we come and we add the value 95
into the heap and we put it here.
This isn't a heap anymore
because this is a max heap
and in a max heap, the value at the parent
has to be greater than or equal
to the value of its children
and if we come along and stick 95 at the end
of the array, that's obviously not gonna be true.
First of all, it's the maximum value,
so it should be at position zero
but its immediate parent, if it was index eight,
its parent would be eight minus one is seven
over two is 3.5, so its parent is 15.
15 is obviously not greater than or equal to 95
and so, we have to heapify this heap,
meaning we have to fix it.
We have to move 95 into its correct position
and so, the way we do this,
it's really not that complicated at all.
What we do is we compare the new item
against its parent and we can get its parent
using that calculation, that expression,
and if the item is greater than its parent,
we swap the item with its parent.
And then we just keep rinsing and repeating
until it either ends up being the root
or its less than its parent.
And so, let's look at an example.
We're going to insert a value into this tree
and so, we're gonna start by putting it here
because remember, when we insert values into a heap,
we put them into the next available position
to keep this tree as a complete tree
and so, the next available position is here.
And so, in our array, we're gonna put it here,
so pretend there's more array beyond here
and we have an empty slot at index eight.
We're gonna go through it visually
with the tree so you can kind of see
what would happen but of course,
when we're doing the swapping,
we're just swapping two items in the array
just like we did when we went through sort algorithms.
And so, we're gonna start out by putting 20 here.
We're gonna insert the value 20.
Now this is not a heap anymore
because 20 is greater than 15
and so, this is no longer a max heap
and so, the first thing we're gonna do
is compare 20 against its parent,
so we compare 20 against 15,
20 is greater than 15 and so, we're gonna swap it
with its parent and so, 15 ends up down here
and now 20 is here, so now we rinse and repeat.
So, we're gonna compare 20 against its parent.
Well, 20 is greater than 19,
so we're gonna swap these guys
and so, now 20 is up here
and now we're gonna compare 20 against 22,
20 is less than 22
and so, we have finished the heapify process
and this is now a heap.
Every node has a value greater than or equal to its children
and this is very simple to do
because we'll store the heap as an array
and so, when we're comparing,
all we have to do is calculate where the node's parent is,
compare them and if the new value in the new node
is less than the parent value,
we just swap them and so, this swapping works
because the characteristic of, in this case,
the max heap is maintained when we swap
because every time we swap we're swapping
a greater value with its parent
and so, we know that after the swap,
the parent will have a greater value than the child.
And so, that's all there is
to storing a complete binary tree
as an array and all there is heapifying the heap
after we insert a value.
Now obviously we would also have to heapify
after deleting a value
and in that case, it would be a little bit more involved
because it depends on which node we're deleting,
where it's located in the tree
and so, we'll take a look at what we do for a delete
in a later video but for now,
let's move on and let's start to implement a heap.
I'll see you in the next video.